articles a the an
A CHANGED MAN 

The person who, next to the actors themselves, 
chanced to know most of their story, lived just below 
"Top o' Town" (as the spot was called) in an old 
substantially built house, distinguished among its 
neighbours by having an oriel window on the first 
floor, whence could be obtained a raking view of the 
High Street, west and east, the former including 
Laura's dwelling, the end of the Town Avenue hard 
by (in which were played the odd pranks hereafter 
to be mentioned), the Port-Bredy road rising west- 
wards, and the turning that led to the cavalry bar- 
racks where the Captain was quartered. Looking 
eastward down the town from the same favoured 
gazebo, the long perspective of houses declined and 
dwindled till they merged in the highway across the 
moor. The white riband of road disappeared over 
Grey's Bridge a quarter of a mile off, to plunge into 
innumerable rustic windings, shy shades, and solitary 
tmdulations up hill and down dale for one hundred 
and twenty miles till it exhibited itself at Hyde Park 
Comer as a smooth bland surface in touch with a 
busy and fashionable world. 

To the barracks aforesaid had recently arrived the 
— ^th Hussars, a regiment new to the locality. Almost 
before any acquaintance with its members had been 
made by the townspeople, a report spread that they 
were a 'crack* body of men, and had brought a 

3 



 

splendid band. For some reason or other the town 
had not been used as the headquarters of cavalry for 
many years, the various troops stationed there having 
consisted of casual detachments only; so that it was 
with a sense of honour that everybody — even the 
small furniture-broker from whom the married troop- 
ers hired tables and chairs — ^received the news of 
their crack quality. 

In those days the Hussar regiments still wore over 
the left shoulder that attractive attachment, or frilled 
half-coat, hanging loosely behind like the wounded 
wing of a bird, which was called the pelisse, though it 
was known among the troopers themselves as a ' sling- 
jacket.' It added amazingly to their picturesqueness 
in women's eyes, and, indeed, in the eyes of men also. 

The burgher who lived in the house with the oriel 
window sat during a great many hours of the day in 
that projection, for he was an invalid, and time hung 
heavily on his hands unless he maintained a constant 
interest in proceedings without. Not more than a 
week after the arrival of the Hussars his ears were 
assailed by the shout of one schoolboy to another in 
the street below. 

'Have 'ee heard this about the Hussars? They 
are haunted! Yes — a ghost troubles 'em; he has 
followed 'em about the world for years.' 

A haunted regiment : that was a new idea for either 
invalid or stalwart. The listener in the oriel came to 
the conclusion that there were some lively characters 
among the — ^th Hussars. 

He made Captain Maumbry's acquaintance in an 
informal manner at an afternoon tea to which he 
went in a wheeled chair — one of the very rare outings 
that the state of his health permitted. Matimbry 
showed himself to be a handsome man of twenty- 
eight or thirty, with an attractive hint of wickedness 
in his manner that was sure to make him adorable 
with good young women. The large dark eyes that 
lit his pale face expressed this wickedness strongly, 

4 



 

though such was the adaptability of their rays that 
one could think they might have expressed sadness 
or seriousness just as readily, if he had had a mind 
for such. 

An old and deaf lady who was present asked Cap- 
tain Matimbry bluntly: 'What's this we hear about 
you? They say your regiment is haunted/ 

The Captain's face asstimed an aspect of grave, 
even sad, concern. 'Yes,' he replied, 'it's too true.' 

Some younger ladies smiled till they saw how seri- 
ous he looked, when they looked serious likewise. 

'Really?' said the old lady. 

' Yes. We naturally don't wish to say much about 
it.' 

'No, no; of course not. But — ^how haunted?' 

'Well; the — things as I'll call it, follows us. In 
coimtry quarters or town, abroad or at home, it's just 
the same.' 

'How do you account for it?' 

' H'm.' Maumbry lowered his voice. ' Some crime 
committed by certain of our regiment in past years, we 
suppose.' 

'Dear me. . . . How very horrid, and singular!' 

'But, as I said, we don't speak of it much.' 

'No . . . no.' 

When the Hussar was gone, a young lady, disclosing 
a long-suppressed interest, asked if the ghost had been 
seen by any of the town. 

The lawyer's son, who always had the latest borough 
news, said that, though it was seldom seen by any one 
but the Htissars themselves, more than one townsman 
and woman had already set eyes on it, to his or her 
terror. The phantom mostly appeared very late at 
night, under the dense trees of the Town Avenue 
nearest the barracks. It was about ten feet high; 
its teeth chattered with a' dry naked sound, as if they 
were those of a skeleton; and its hip-bones could be 
heard grating in their sockets. 

During the darkest weeks of winter several timid 

5 



 

persons were seriously frightened by the object answer- 
ing to this cheerful description, and the police began 
to look into the matter. Whereupon the appearances 
grew less frequent, and some of the Boys of the regi- 
ment thankfully stated that they had not been so free 
from ghostly visitation for years as they had become 
since their arrival in Casterbridge. 

This playing at ghosts was the most innocent of the 
amusements indulged in by the choice young spirits 
who inhabited the lichened, red-brick building at the 
top of the town bearing ' W. D.' and a broad arrow on 
its quoins. Far more serious escapades — levities re- 
lating to love, wine, cards, betting — ^were talked of, 
with no doubt more or less of exaggeration. That the 
Hussars, Captain Maimibry included, were the cause 
of bitter tears to several young women of the town 
and coimtry is imquestionably true, despite the fact 
that the gaieties of the young men wore a more 
staring colour in this old-fashioned place than they 
would have done in a large and modem city. 



II 

Regularly once a week they rode out in marching 
order. 

Returning up the town on one of these occasions, 
the romantic pelisse flapping behind each horseman's 
shoulder in the soft southwest wind. Captain Maum- 
bry glanced up at the oriel. A mutual nod was ex- 
changed between him and the person who sat there 
reading. The reader and a friend in the room with 
him followed the troop with their eyes all the way up 
the street, till, when the soldiers were opposite the 
house in which Laura lived, that young lady became 
discernible in the balcony. 

'They are engaged to be married, I hear,' said the 
friend. 

* Who — Maumbry and Lraura? Never — so soon?* 

6 



 

'Yes.' 

'He'll never many. Several girls have been men- 
tioned in connection with his name. I am sorry for 
Laura/ 

'Oh, but you needn't be. They are excellently 
matched.' 

'She's only one more.' 

' She's one more, and more still. She has regularly 
caught him. She is a bom player of the game of 
hearts, and she knew how to beat him in his own 
practices. If there is one woman in the town who has 
any chance of holding her own and marrying him, she 
is that woman.' 

This was true, as it turned out. By natural pro- 
cUvity Laura had from the first entered heart and soul 
into military romance as exhibited in the plots and 
characters of those living exponents of it who came 
under her notice. From her earliest yoimg woman- 
hood civilians, however promising, had no chance of 
winning her interest if the meanest warrior were within 
the horizon. It may be that the position of her uncle's 
house (which was her home) at the comer of West 
Street nearest the barracks, the daily passing of the 
troops, the constant blowing of trumpet-calls a fur- 
long from the windows, coupled with the fact that she 
knew nothing of the inner reaUties of military life, 
and hence idealized it, had also helped her mind's 
original bias for thinking men-at-arms the only ones 
worthy of a woman's heart. 

Captain Matmibry was a typical prize; one whom 
all stuTounding maidens had coveted, ached for, angled 
for, wept for, had by her judicious management be- 
come subdued to her purpose ; and in addition to the 
pleasure of manying the man she loved, Laura had 
the joy of feeling herself hated by the mothers of all 
the marriageable girls of the neighbourhood. 

The man in the oriel went to the wedding; not as 
a guest, for at this time he was but slightly acquainted 
with the parties; but mainly because the church was 

7 



 

close to his house; partly, too, for a reason which 
moved many others to be spectators of the ceremony ; 
a subconsciousness that, though the couple might be 
happy in their experiences, there was sufficient possi- 
bility of their being otherwise to colour the musings of 
an onlooker with a pleasing pathos of conjecture. He 
could on occasion do a pretty stroke of rhyming in those 
days, and he beguiled the time of waiting by penciling 
on a blank page of his prayer-book a few lines which, 
though kept private then, may be given here: — 

At a Hasty Wedding 
{Triolet) 

If hours be years the twain are blest, 

For now they solace swift desire 
By lifelong ties that tether zest 

If hours be years. The twain are blest 
Do eastern suns slope never west, 

Nor pallid ashes follow fire. 
If hours be years the twain are blest 

For now tiiey solace swift desire. 

* 

As if, however, to falsify all prophecies, the couple 
seemed to find in marriage the secret of perpetuating 
the intoxication of a courtship which, on Maumbry's 
side at least, had opened without serious intent. Dur- 
ing the winter following they were the most popular 
pair in and about Casterbridge — nay in South Wessex 
itself. No smart dinner in the country-houses of the 
younger and gayer f amiUes within driving distance of 
the borough was complete without their lively pres- 
ence ; Mrs. Maumbry was the blithest of the whirling 
figures at the county ball; and when followed that 
inevitable incident of garrison town life, an amatetu" 
dramatic entertainment, it was just the same. The 
acting was for the benefit of such and such an excellent 
charity — ^nobody cared what, provided the play were 
played — and both Captain Maumbry and his wife 
were in the piece, having been in fact, by mutual con- 
sent, the originators of the performance. And so with 

8 



 

laughter, and thoughtlessness, and movement, all 
went merrily. There was a little backwardness in the 
bill-paying of the couple; but in justice to them it 
must be added that sooner or later all owings were 
paid. 

Ill 

At the chapel-of-ease attended by the troops there 
arose above the edge of the pulpit one Sunday an 
tmknown face. This was the face of a new curate. 
He placed upon the desk not the familiar sermon book, 
but merely a Bible. The person who tells these things 
was not present at that service, but he soon learnt that 
the young curate was nothing less than a great surprise 
to his congregation; a mixed one always, for though 
the Hussars occupied the body of the building, its 
nooks and comers were crammed with civilians, whom, 
up to the present, even the least uncharitable would 
have described as being attracted thither less by the 
services than by the soldiery. 

Now there arose a second reason for squeezing into 
an already overcrowded church. The persuasive and 
gentle eloquence of Mr. Sainway operated like a charm 
upon those accustomed only to the higher and dryer 
styles of preaching, and for a time the other churches 
of the town were thinned of their sitters. 

At this point in the nineteenth century the sermon 
was the sole reason for churchgoing amongst a vast 
body of religious people. The liturgy was a formal 
preliminary, which, like the Royal proclamation in a 
court of assize, had to be got through before the real 
interest began ; and on readiing home the question was 
simply: Who preached, and how did he handle his 
subject? Even had an archbishop officiated in the 
service proper nobody would have cared much about 
what was said or sung. People who had formerly 
attended in the morning only began to go in the even- 
ing, and even to the spinal addresses in the afternoon. 
2 9 



 

One day when Captain Matimbry entered his wife's 
drawing-room, filled with hired ftimiture, she thought 
he was somebody else, for he had not come upstairs 
humming the most catching air afloat in musical cir- 
cles or in his usual careless way. 

' What's the matter. Jack?' she said without looking 
up from a note she was writing. 

' Well — not much, that I know.' 

*0, but there is,' she murmured as she wrote. 

*Why — ^this cursed new lath in a sheet — ^I mean 
the new parson! He wants us to stop the band- 
playing on Sunday afternoons.' 

Laura looked up aghast. 

*Why, it is the one thing that enables the few 
rational beings hereabouts to keep alive from Saturday 
to Monday!' 

*He says all the town flock to the music and don't 
come to the service, and that the pieces played are 
profane, or mundane, or inane, or something — not 
what ought to be played on Sunday. Of course 'tis 
Lautmann who settles those things.' 

Lautmann was the bandmaster. 

The barrack-green on Sunday afternoons had, in- 
deed, become the promenade of a great many towns- 
people cheerfully inclined, many even of those who 
attended in the morning at Mr. Sainway's service; 
and little boys who ought to have been Kstening to the 
curate's afternoon lecture were too often seen lolling 
upon the grass and making faces behind the more 
dignified listeners. 

Laura heard no more about the matter, however, for 
two or three weeks, when suddenly remembering it she 
asked her husband if any further objections had been 
raised. 

' O — Mr. Sainway. I forgot to tell you. I've made 
his acquaintance. He is not a bad sort of man.' 

Laura asked if either Matimbry or some others of 

the officers did not give the presumptuous curate a 

good setting down for his interference. 

xo 



 

'O well — we've forgotten that. He's a stunning 
preacher they tell me.' 

The acquaintance developed apparently, for the 
Captain said to her a little later on, 'There's a good 
deal in Sainway's argument about having no band on 
Sunday afternoons. After all, it is close to his church. 
But he doesn't press his objections unduly.' 

*I am surprised to hear you defend him!' 

'It was only a passing thought of mine. We 
naturally don't wish to offend the inhabitants of the 
town if they don't like it.' 

'But they do.' 

The invalid in the oriel never clearly gathered the 
details of progress in this conflict of lay and clerical 
opinion ; but so it was that, to the disappointment of 
musicians, the grief of out-walking lovers, and the re- 
gret of the junior population of the town and cotmtry 
round, the band-playing on Stmday afternoons ceased 
in Casterbridge barrack-square. 

By this time the Maumbrys had frequently listened 
to the preaching of the gentle if narrow-minded curate ; 
for these light-natured, hit-or-miss, rackety people 
went to church like others for respectability's sake. 
None so orthodox as your unmitigated worldling. A 
more remarkable event was the sight to the man in the 
window of Captain Maumbry and Mr. Sainway walk- 
ing down the High Street in earnest conversation. On 
his mentioning this fact to a caller he was assured 
that it was a matter of common talk that they were 
always together. 

The observer would soon have learnt this with his 

own eyes if he had not been told. They began to pass 

together nearly every day. Hitherto Mrs. Maumbry, 

in fashionable walking clothes, had usually been her 

husband's companion ; but this was less frequent now. 

The close and singular friendship between the two men 

went on for nearly a year, when Mr. Sainway was 

presented to a living in a densely populated town in 

the midland counties. He bade the parishioners of his 

II 



 

old place a reluctant farewell and departed, the touch- 
ing sermon he preached on the occasion being pub- 
li^ed by the local printer. Everybody was sorry to 
lose him; and it was with genuine grief that his 
Casterbridge congregation learnt later on that soon 
after his induction to his benefice, during some bitter 
weather, he had fallen seriously ill of inflammation 
of the lungs, of which he eventually died. 

We now get below the stirface of things. Of all 
who had known the dead curate, none grieved for him 
like the man who on his first arrival had called him a 
'lath in a sheet.' Mrs. Maumbry had never greatly 
sympathized with the impressive parson; indeed, she 
had been secretly glad that he had gone away to better 
himself. He had considerably diminished the pleas- 
ures of a woman by whom the joys of earth and good 
company had been appreciated to the full. Sorry for 
her husband in his loss of a friend who had been none 
of hers, she was yet quite imprepared for the sequel. 

* There is something that I have wanted to tell you 
lately, dear,' he said one morning at breakfast with 
hesitation. ' Have you guessed what it is?' 

She had guessed nothing. 

* That I fiiink of retiring from the army.' 
'Whatr 

* I have thought more and more of Sainway since his 
death, and of what he used to say to me so earnestly. 
And I feel certain I shall be right in obeying a call 
within me to give up this fighting trade and enter the 
Church.' 

'What — ^be a parson?' 
'Yes.' 

'But what should / do?' 
'Be a parson's wife.' 
'Never!' she affirmed. 
' But how can you help it?' 
'I'll run away rather!' she said vehemently. 
' No, you mustn't,' Maiunbry replied, in the tone he 
used when his mind was made up. 'You'll get ac- 

xa 



 

customed to the idea, for I am constrained to carry- 
it out, though it is against my worldly interests. I 
am forced on by a Hand outside me to tread in the 
steps of Sainway.' 

'Jack,' she asked, with calm pallor and rotmd eyes; 
' do you mean to say seriously that you are arranging 
to be a curate instead of a soldier?' 

'I might say a curate is a soldier — of the church 
militant; but I don't want to offend you with doc- 
trine. I distinctly say, yes.' 

Late one evening, a little time onward, he caught 
her sitting by the dim firelight in her room. She did 
not know he had entered ; and he f otmd her weep- 
ing. 'What are you crying about, poor dearest?' 
he said. 

She started. 'Because of what you have told me!' 

The Captain grew very tmhappy; but he was un- 
deterred. 

In due time the town learnt, to its intense surprise, 
that Captain Maumbry had retired from the — ^th 
Hussars, and gone to Fotmtall Theological College to 
prepare for the ministry. 



IV 

'O, the pity of it! Such a dashing soldier — so 
popular — such an acquisition to the town — the soul 
of social life here! And now! . . . One should not 
speak ill of the dead, but that dreadful Mr. Sainway 
— ^it was too cruel of him !' 

This is a summary of what was said when Captain, 
now the Reverend, John Maumbry was enabled by 
circumstances to indulge his heart's desire of returning 
to the scene of his former exploits in the capacity of a 
minister of the Gospel. A low-lying district of the 
town, which at that date was crowded with impover- 
ished cottagers, was crying for a curate, and Mr. 
Maumbry generously offered himself as one willing to 

13 



 

undertake labours that were certain to produce little 
result, and no thanks, credit, or emolument. 

Let the truth be told about him as a clergyman ; he 
proved to be anything but a brilliant success. Pains- 
taking, single-minded, deeply in earnest as all could 
see, his deUvery was labotired, his sermons were dull 
to listen to, and alas, too, too long. Even the dis- 
passionate judges who sat l3y the hour in the bar-par- 
lotir of the White Hart — ^an inn standing at the divid- 
ing line between the poor quarter aforesaid and the 
fashionable quarter of Matmibry's former triumphs, 
and hence affording a position of strict impartiality — 
agreed in substance with the yotmg ladies to the west- 
ward, though their views were somewhat more tersely 
expressed: 'Surely, God A 'mighty spwiled a good 
sojer to make a bad pa'son when He shifted Cap'n 
Ma 'mbry into a sarpless !' 

The latter knew that such things were said, but he 
pursued his daily labours in and out of the hovels with 
serene unconcern. 

It was about this time that the invalid in the oriel 
became more than a mere bowing acquaintance of 
Mrs. Maumbry's. She had returned to the town with 
her husband, and was living with him in a little house 
in the centre of his circle of ministration, when by some 
means she became one of the invalid's visitors. After 
a general conversation while sitting in his room with a 
friend of both, an incident led up to the matter that 
still rankled deeply in her soul. Her face was now 
paler and thinner than it had been ; even more attrac- 
tive, her disappointments having inscribed themselves 
as meek thoughtfulness on a look that was once a little 
frivolous. The two ladies had called to be allowed to 
use the windows, for observing the departure of the 
Hussars, who were leaving for barracks much nearer to 
London. 

The troopers turned the comer of Barrack Road into 
the top of High Street, headed by their band playing 
'The girl I left behind me* (which was formerly al- 

14 



 

ways the tune for such times, though it is now nearly 
disused). They came and passed the oriel, where an 
ofl&cer or two, looking up and discovering Mrs. Maum- 
bry, saluted her, whose eyes filled with tears as the 
notes of the band waned away. Before the little 
group had recovered from that sense of the romantic 
which such spectacles impart, Mr. Maumbry came 
along the pavement. He probably had bidden his 
former brethren-in-arms a farewell at the top of the 
street, for he walked from that direction in his rather 
shabby clerical clothes, and with a basket on his arm 
which seemed to hold some purchases he had been 
making for his poorer parishioners. Unlike the sol- 
diers he went along quite tmconsdous of his appear- 
ance or of the scene arotmd. 

The contrast was too much for Laura. With lips 
that now quivered, she asked the invalid what he 
thought of the change that had come to her. 

It was difficult to answer, and with a wilfulness that 
was too strong in her she repeated the question. 

'Do you thmk,' she added, 'that a woman's hus- 
band has a right to do such a thing, even if he does 
feel a certain call to it?' 

Her listener sympathized too largely with both of 
them to be anything but tmsatisfactory in his reply. 
Laura gazed longingly out of the window towards the 
thin dusty line of Hussars, now smalling towards 
the Mellstock Ridge. 'I,' she said, 'who should have 
been in their van on the way to London, am doomed 
to fester in a hole on Dumover Lane!' 

Many events had passed, and many rumours had 
been current concerning her before the invalid saw 
her again after her leave-taking that day. 



V 

Casterbridge had known many military and civil 
episodes; many happy times, and times less happy; 

IS 



 

and now came the time of her visitation. The 
scourge of cholera had been laid on the suffering 
cotmtry, and the low-l3ring purlieus of this ancient 
borough had more than their share of the infliction. 
Mixen Lane, in the Dumover quarter, and in Maum- 
bry's parish, was where the blow fell most heavily. 
Yet there was a certain mercy in its choice of a date, 
for Maumbry was the man for such an hour. 

The spread of the epidemic was so rapid that many 
left the town and took lodgings in the villages and 
farms. Mr. Maumbry's house was close to the most 
infected street, and he himself was occupied mom, 
noon,'and night in endeavours to stamp out the plague 
and in alleviating the sufferings of the victims. So, 
as a matter of ordinary precaution, he decided to 
isolate his wife somewhere away from him for a 
while. 

She suggested a village by the sea, near Budmouth- 
Regis, and lodgings were obtained for her at Crest on, 
a spot divided from the Casterbridge valley by a 
high ridge that gave it quite another atmosphere, 
though it lay no more than six miles off. 

Thither she went. While she was rusticating in 
this place of safety, and her husband was slaving in 
the sltmis, she struck up an acquaintance with a 
lieutenant in the — st Foot, a Mr. Vannicock, who 
was stationed with his regiment at the Budmouth 
infantry barracks. As Laura frequently sat on the 
shelving beach, watching each thin wave slide up to 
her, and hearing, without heeding, its gnaw at the 
pebbles in its retreat, he often took a walk that way. 

The acquaintance grew and ripened. Her situa- 
tion, her history, her beauty, her age — a year or two 
above his own-ku tended to make an impression on 
the yotmg man's heart, and a reckless flirtation was 
soon in blithe progress upon that lonely shore. 

It was said by her detractors afterwards that she 

had chosen her lodgings to be near this gentleman, 

but there is reason to believe that she had never 

i6 



 

seen him till her arrival there. Just now Caster- 
bridge was so deeply occupied with its own sad affairs 
— B, daily burying of the dead, and destruction of 
contaminated clothes and bedding — ^that it had little 
inclination to promulgate such gossip as may have 
reached its ears on the pair. Nobody long considered 
Laura in the tragic doud which overhtmg all. 

Meanwhile, on the Budmouth side of the hill the 
very mood of men was in contrast. The visitation 
there had been slight and much earlier, and normal 
occupations and pastimes had been restmied. Mr. 
Maumbry had arranged to see Laura twice a week 
in the open air, that she might run no risk from him ; 
and, having heard nothing of the faint rumoiu-, he 
met her as usual one dry and windy afternoon on 
the summit of the dividing hill, near where the high 
road from town to town crosses the old Ridgeway at 
right angles. 

He waved his hand, and smiled as she approached, 
shouting to her: 'We will keep this wall between us, 
dear.* (Walls formed the field-fences here.) 'You 
mustn't be endangered. It won't be for long, with 
God's help!' 

' I will do as you tell me. Jack. But you are run- 
ning too much risk yourself, aren't you? I get little 
news of you; but I fancy you are.' 

'Not more than others.' 

Thus somewhat formally they talked, an insulat- 
ing wind beating the wall between them like a mill- 
weir. 

' But you wanted to ask me something?' he added. 

'Yes. You know we are trying in Budmouth to 
raise some money for your stdTerers; and the way 
'we have thought of is by a dramatic performance. 
They want me to take a part.' 

His face saddened. *I have known so much of 
that sort of thing, and all that accompanies it! I 
wish you had thought of some other way.' 

She said lightly that she was afraid it was all set- 